Below is a high-level explanation of the engine without getting too deep into implementation specifics.
This is just here incase you are curious but don't want to read through all of the code.

Overview:
A game is modeled as it's settings and a series of states, starting from an InitialState and eventually ending on a FinalState.
When the simulation is ran, the program simply calls step/4.
this predicate takes in the settings and a State
and converts it into NextState
by updating the State according to the rules of the simulation.
this process is done recursively until the exit condition has been reached
(that being, a team has a winning score)
These series of states are then exported to a JSON file for use in the visualization system

Simulation:
In the simulation, the world is modeled as a box with some width and height, where coordinates (0,0) refers to the top left of the box and (width, height) refers to the bottom right of the box.
The bounds of the simulation are modeled as solid walls.

In the world there are 2 types of objects
the ball and the agents

Ball Physics:
the ball is modeled as a position and a velocity.
Every step, the ball's velocity is added to it's position.
then a check is performed to see if the ball is within a goal.
If it is the simulation is reset and the score is awarded.
otherwise the simulation continues.

Every step, friction is modeled by multiplying a value to the ball's velocity
this value is part of the settings

When the ball collides with a wall
it loses some of it's velocity (specified in settings)
and bounces in the opposite direction

Agents:
Agents are modeled as circles on the field
each agent has a position and energy
each agent also has a "Controller", which is responsible for deciding what actions an agent takes

every step:
the state of the world, including things like the ball and other agents are passed into the agent's controller
that controller is then responsible for deciding what action the agent will take that step
that agent takes the action decided by the controller
the agent regenerates energy
agent collisions are resolved

there are 3 possible actions
1) move
action(move, TargetPosition, MovementFactor)
the agent will attempt to move towards the target position, using MovementFactor to determine how fast to move
MovementFactor is modeled as a number from 0 to 1, where 1 represents the maximum possible distance the agent can move (defined by the settings).
The Agent then loses some amount of energy according to this formula.
(Base Energy Cost) * 2^log_1.5(Distance)
The idea being, moving a distance of 1 costs some amount of energy (Base Energy Cost)
then for every 1.5x the distance, the energy cost is doubled
if the agent doesn't have enough energy to move the movement is canceled and the agent takes the rest action instead

2) kick
action(kick, KickTowardsPosition, KickStrengthFactor)
the agent will attempt to kick the ball towards KickTowardsPosition, using KickStregthFactor to determine how much power to kick the ball with.
KickStrengthFactor is modeled as a number from 0 to 1, where 1 represents the maximum possible kick strength (defined by the settings)
The Agent then loses energy, where kicking with max strength costs some amount of energy and the energy cost
is linearly interpolated for strengths below max
Kick Strength is modeled as the magnitude of velocity change of the ball, for example a kick strength of 1 means that the kick adds a vector of length 1 to the ball's velocity.
if the agent doesn't have enough energy to kick, or the ball is out of reach then the agent takes the rest action instead

3) rest
action(rest)
the agent will regenerate energy twice instead of only once this step

Agent Collisions:
an agent can collide with the walls of the simulation or other agents
when an agent collides with a wall, their position is simply "snapped" to the wall
when an agent collides with another agent, both agents are "snapped" away from each other in opposite
directions until they are no longer overlapping

Randomness:
to introduce randomness to the simulation
agent actions are all slightly probabilistic
whenever an agent takes an action, some amount of randomness is applied to the result
those being:
when an agent kicks, the strength is deviated +/- some amount
the angle of the direction of the kick is also deviation by +/- some degrees
when an agent moves, the distance traveled is deviated +/- some amount
when an agent regenerates energy, the energy regenerated is deviated +/- some amount
these values are defined within the settings

Step Resolution Order:
ball moves
goal is checked
if goal:
award points and reset round
if no goal:
ball bounces from any walls if it is colliding with a wall
ball velocity is dampened
agents take actions
agent collisions with walls/other agents are resolved
